---
title: Rain, Rain, Go Away
tags: [college, d&d-5e, advice, ]
category: Blog
---

> Migrated and edited from the Temple of Time site, where it was originally
> posted by me as I experimented with GitHub pages.

> Rain, rain, go away
>
> Come again another day.

So, it's supposed to rain. All week. Everyday. And on Monday, it poured,
[deluged](http://www2.ucar.edu/sites/default/files/news/2013/bearcreek.jpg),
flooded; it "rained" so hard that water came gushing down hills like a freak of
nature and the wind blew fiercely enough to create dry spots on the ground. Of
course, that just meant the water that _was_ on the ground blew up into my face.
Oh, and yeah, I got wet.

All of my stuff _also_ got wet. My shorts were a different color, my shoes are
still wet after over 24 hours, and, to top it all off, my backpack leaked yellow
water all over the bottom of my notebooks. So yeah, rainy Mondays suck.

## Big Ideas

But you know what? It's all OK. My stuff is starting to dry, finally, and I had
a wonderful revelation. It came, as all great thoughts do, while I was eating.
(Some of my better thoughts come while showering and before I sleep, too.) I was
discussing the atrocious flood I had experienced with a friend, and he was
griping about the stress of his week, and we both agreed that it is **a great
week to have a terrible week**.

You're probably wondering, OK, that sounds witty, but what the heck am I
supposed to do with that? It's not very uplifting, and really I'm just setting
myself up for a [terrible
week](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_and_the_Terrible,_Horrible,_No_Good,_Very_Bad_Day).
Ah, but you missed the important part! You'll be having the _best_ terrible week
you've ever had! And that's the point. If you can't laugh about it during the
week, then you really will have a terrible week. Laughing about it afterwards is
all fine and good, but it's incredibly depressing to have a bad week. So make it
the best bad week you've ever had.

## Dungeons and Dragons

Alright, this is the moment all you nerds out there have been waiting for: this
is why you slogged through some crazy philosophical something that only halfway
makes sense---you wanted to read about epic fantasy and stuff. Well, sorry to
disappoint. We will be discussing Dungeons and Dragons (specifically 5th
edition), but it won't be the fun parts. Instead, we're gonna talk about rain.

See, here's the kicker to my discussion above: when I narrate rain in a D&D
session, I gloss over the finer details and say something along the lines of

> It's raining so hard you can't see your hand in front of your face.

Now, if I'm being honest, that's just terrible. I'm requiring my players to be
creative in their imagination, which I am to help them with as DM. This is the
narrative, describing-the-world-around-you part that a DM has to do. I left out
the parts about wet branches smacking their faces and fat drops falling from
leaves smacking their faces, and if I'm being really mean the surprise arrows
smacking their faces. Add to all that, there's no decent mechanic built in that
takes care of rain. Sure, there's "lightly obscured," but half the time I
forget about things like that anyways, and if I forget about the rain or the
vision impediments, you can bet my players will too.

### Solutions (i.e., some houserules I made up)

So what do we do? Well, we could rule that Dashing, or moving in a particularly
wet area, requires a Dex check to stay upright. It's the perfect scenario for a
check (more on that in a [later post]({% link _posts/2016-09-30-skill-check.md
%}): there's a definite cost for failure (falling prone, costing movement speed
to stand up, &c.), and there's a failure and success case.

Well, let's say that
only applies in situations where running fast is _important_; otherwise, the
cost is just mud everywhere. So far, so good.

But how often do you have to check? Once per dash/move? Or every 5 ft.
(*shudders*)? Well, since it costs _half_ your movement to stand back up, what
if I make the check every time you move half your speed? That sounds
reasonable…Except now the rain definitely puts Strength-based builds at a
disadvantage if they dumped Dex. Do I say, "Ha sucks" and move on? Yes, yes I
do. It's the correct answer: raw strength won't help you stay on your feet.

If I remember to describe the rain graphically, and how it affects each
arrow or sword swing, I can make a simple woodland fight against an owlbear clan
into a gruesome, muddy, slip-and-slide. This actually might be a really tough
battle if the players find that they fall prone a lot, leaving the lumbering
owlbears to finish them off.

Only, one more thing. Remember how earlier I was saying, "rain sucks" and, "all
your stuff gets wet" and, "it tires me out"? Sounds like something I could
model! And the exhaustion mechanic fits perfectly: I think something along the
lines of

> Every hour traveled in a downpour, characters not wearing appropriate rain
> protection gear must make a DC 10 Con save or gain a level of exhaustion. The
> DC increases by one for every hour after the first, and resets to 10 if the
> character gets a good night's sleep and its gear is permitted to dry.

That's pretty good! Now, I can make them fall down _and_ feel the pain (my pain)
of walking around in storm weather for hours! Muahahaha...I mean, uh. I like my
players, and want them to come back next time...

### An Important Note about Simulation

Obviously, D&D at its core is not a dedicated real-life simulation: it's some
rules and fantasy objects put together to allow players to come together and do
epic fantasy hero stuff. Like own a tavern, or a crab-shell harvesting
apothecary, or slay all the skeletons in every stereotypical graveyard. So, if
your table doesn't like the level of simulation created by analyzing just the
weather, *leave it out!* You'll make them miserable! But if everyone is playing
Rangers and Druids and Barbarians and wants to play a survivalist game? Things
like the weather become massively more important, and having good mechanics to
help and hinder the party will help them interact with your world.

## Conclusion

Rain is a terrible, wonderful, terrible thing, for players and humans alike. It
has been the source of many a great existential thought, the cause of much
damage, and the bringer of life. Ultimately, it's just one of those things we
live with all the time. But it doesn't have to be all bad.

>[I'm walking on
>sunshine!](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walking_on_Sunshine_(Katrina_and_the_Waves_song))
