---
title: Git Branch Cheat
tags: [ git ]
category: Code
---
Sometimes, you need to do a particular operation on every single branch in a
repo, like pushing or merging. I thought it would be difficult. It's not.

## The Code (Script)

_Preface:_ I do use [Bash][bash] (no arguing about which shell is best), so this
may not apply to everyone. I'm looking at you, Windows people.

```bash
for branch in $(ls .git/refs/heads); do
    git checkout $branch
    # git operation on branch
done
```

*Update* It has come to my attention that rather than parsing `ls` output, we
can use globs.

```bash
for branch in .git/refs/heads/*; do
    branch="$(basename "$branch")"
    git checkout "$branch"
    # blah blah blah
done
```

### Breaking It Down

The first part is a standard Bash for-loop. Lots of people caution against for
loops on files this way, but we're actually using filenames as branch names, and
this is far more readable than using `find`.

The tricky part is `$(ls .git/refs/heads)`. The `$()` bit means evaluate the
parentheses as a shell command. The `ls .git/refs/heads` bit lists the files in
.git/refs/heads, whose names are the names of branches.

Thus, we have a loop over the branch names. `git checkout $branch` is familiar
to git cli users; simply checkout the branch. Then perform any operations on it
you'd like. `done` signals the end of the loop.

### Variations

You can optionally quote the branch listing into `"$(ls .git/refs/heads)"`.

You can also follow `done` with another command, like checking out master again.
You would then have `done; git checkout master`.

## Uses

My most frequent uses are pushing all branches to remotes, and merging all
branches with master. I only do this when I know it's a fast-forward merge, but
this makes it relatively easy to quickly update all branches with the lastest
master developments (probably themselves merged in from one of the branches).

[bash]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell)
