---
title: 'Re: Dumpster Diving through Dotfiles'
tags: [ til, shell, git, performance ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

I learn a lot after [some advice from
thoughtbot](https://thoughtbot.com/blog/dumpster-diving-through-dotfiles-git-branches).

## Dumpster-diving?

Thoughtbot apparently started a new series on finding tricks in folks' Dotfiles.
As you may know by now, I maintain [my own]({{ site.data.people.benknoble.dotfiles}})
over on GitHub. I peruse others for fun and often learn a lot.

Well, in the course of [adjusting their git-branches
alias](https://github.com/benknoble/Dotfiles/commit/0ed70bb29a12fa53368919f1b7a1526725a1a074),
I found a new trick.

## `g` for `git`

I have long had `alias g='git'` in my bash files, along with the appropriate
completion definition. But I saw that thoughtbot had a `g` function which does a
`git-status` if no arguments are provided! This is genius, says I, and I
convert.

> Aside: In doing so, I forgot to `unalias g` prior to reload my files. That
> caused the function definition `g() { ... }` to expand to `git() { ...
> }`—worse, since that definition calls git, I had made every invocation of git
> (including that of my `PS1` prompt) a recursive stack overflow.
>
> Lesson: prefer functions if the complexity can grow.

## More performance problems

Anyways, as you may remember from [earlier]({% link
_posts/2019-08-14-cstat-efficiencies.md %}), my Dotfiles repo is *big*. At time
of writing:

```bash
λ g cstat count
1707
λ du -hd1 .git
 16K    .git/gitweb
1,4M    .git/objects
  0B    .git/rr-cache
8,0K    .git/info
 84K    .git/logs
 24K    .git/hooks
 12K    .git/refs
 40M    .git/modules
 42M    .git
```

So the sucker is, well, large (and note how big `.git/modules` is—we'll be
coming back to that).

Testing out my new `g` function, I found that `git status -sb` was taking half a
second to complete, where on other repos it ran 10-100x faster. What gives?

Naïvely, I tried `git gc` (even with `--aggressive`, which git admits you
probably don't need). This shaved off 6MB to get the numbers you see now. But
the performance didn't waver.

Thinking back to those numbers (and a trace of git code I'd accidentally done
recently, wherein there were calls to submodule code), I remembered this
little gem:

```bash
λ g submodule | wc -l
      47
```

A quick experiment revealed the issue. After issuing `git submodule deinit
--all`, speeds were back to normal. Having a lot of vim plugins is catching up
to me…

Long-story short, turning off submodule stuff in the status brings me back down
to the right time. You can do this with a flag on status, but I ended up doing

```bash
λ g config diff.ignoresubmodules all
```

So only my Dotfiles, where the submodules are a problem, ignores them.

Lesson: if your repo has a lot of submodules, you can speed up some operations
with this local configuration. But be sure to check `git submodule summary`
every now and then, just to be sure. In my workflow, I almost always only make
changes by updating the submodules from upstream, so this can be less of an
issue.
