---
title: 'Please do not post images of text'
tags: [ rants, teaching, internet, posts, accessibility ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

If you've never seen this kind of comment on
[StackOverflow](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/q/303812/4400820) (also
[this](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/a/285557/4400820)), I'm going to break it
down for you, because I'm frustrated.

## Where I see this

It happens all the time:

- [vi.stackexchange](https://vi.stackexchange.com)
- [piazza](https://piazza.com) (which my CS classes at UNC use)
- [github](https://github.com)
- class readings---specifically, scanned images of books instead of actual text

## Why it bothers me

Images absolutely ruin the value of the text they contain. They prevent me from
doing all of the things that I naturally do with text: namely, *text
processing*.

No, I'm not talking about Microsoft Word-esque "processing" (which is more
accurately called "typesetting").

I'm talking about transforming, editing, searching, copy-pasting, googling,
analyzing, etc. I'm talking about the power of textual interfaces. I'm talking
about *your* images ruining *my* ability to help you or read for your class.

Have you ever noticed that most programs you deal with on a daily basis are
text-driven, even if they display images to you?

You wouldn't send me a screenshot of your essay to read and edit, would you? No?

*Then stop sending me images of anything else you want me to read!*

### Things I can't do in an image that I could do if it were text

- edit the words
- search for a quote
  - have you ever tried to <kbd>⌘</kbd>-<kbd>f</kbd> a PDF that's actually just
  a scanned image of the text you're supposed to be citing?
- copy-paste your error message into google to see if it's a known issue
- ask a program to read the text to me
  - what if I'm blind?

### Other problems with images

There are a number:

1. Foreground and background colors affect readability in a big way (and I'm not
   even colorblind…).
1. Resolution is wonky. Have you ever considered that between the actual typeset
   text of a book and the scanned PDF on my hard drive, there are no less than 4
   stages of transformation? The scanner, the compression on upload, online
   storage, download, and then finally my actual display? What happens if I zoom
   the image? Proper text would be electronically scalable, like a vector
   graphic, meaning that I can read the text comfortably (without visible
   [aliasing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aliasing) or pixelization).
1. Sometimes, your image is just blurry to begin with.
1. OCR is hard, and I don't have the time to do it on your cruddy images.

## Please stop

For the professors assigning readings: please find actual electronic copies of
the text, if we've got to read digital things.

For the students and others who need help: please copy-paste your code or error
messages.

You've been warned.
