---
title: 'Stop, sed i!'
tags: [ shell, sed, rants, posix ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

Right tool for the job people, right tool for the job :roll_eyes:

## What am I talking about?

I'm referring to all the use of `sed -i` spread wantonly on the internet, *sans*
appropriate caveats.

> Background: most implementations of the `-i` flag allow `sed` to edit files in
> place; by default, it edits standard in and writes to standard out, so you end
> up having to do `<file sed ... >file.new && mv file.new file`. Trying to
> redirect back into the file (`<file sed ... >file`) fails because the file is
> truncated before `sed` gets to read it!

The `-i` flag is [not specified by
POSIX](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/), which makes it
non-portable. This isn't such a big deal, *except* that different `sed`s require
different arguments! GNU `sed` edits in place, no argument provided. BSD `sed`,
such as the one on macOS, requires a suffix:

- if the suffix is non-empty, it places the original file at `file.suffix` and
the new contents in `file`;
- if the suffix is empty, no backup is made.

So now, every `sed -i` solution to a problem needs to *at least*

- mention non portability, and
- mention two different implementations and how they handle it.

I don't know about you, but I wonder if the solution to editing files in place
is a lot simpler… :thinking:

## `sed` for streams, `ed` for files

`sed` stands for "stream editor." It was designed based on the text-editor
`ed`'s commands! `ed` is built to edit files.

- If you need to edit a file in place, use POSIX `ed` (or the improved
POSIX-specified `ex`);
- if you need to transform a stream, `sed` is an option.

I cannot emphasize this enough. Trying to use `sed -i` in any kind of portable
anything is likely to break; worse was the thought that `sed` should ever be
used for editing files! Use a text-editor: if you thought "I'm automating, I
don't want to run a text-editor to automate," well, remember:

- it is entirely possible to automate (read: script) `ed` and `ex`, and
- people today fire up entire web browsers in their desktop applications in
order to automate things---running a tiny text-editor is the least of your
worries.

## Addendum: scripting ed

`ed` takes commands on standard in. It can be made silent with `-s`, and the
argument is a file to edit. I ignore `-p` for now because it isn't useful for
scripting/automation. So, to script `ed`, generate a list of commands and pipe
it in!

```bash
printf '%s\n' g/abc/d w q | ed -s file
```

That's the most portable, but `bash` users can probably do

```bash
ed -s file <<EOF
g/abc/d
w
q
EOF
```

There is quite a bit of flexibility here; the left-hand side could actually be
another *program* that generates `ed` commands on standard out! It turns out,
this is what `diff` does: in its default output mode, we have

> These lines resemble `ed` subcommands to convert `file1` into `file2`. The
> line numbers before the action letters shall pertain to `file1`; those after
> shall pertain to `file2`. Thus, by exchanging `a` for `d` and reading the line
> in reverse order, one can also determine how to convert `file2` into `file1`.
> As in `ed`, identical pairs (where `num1=num2`) are abbreviated as a single
> number.

And when we ask for the `-e` output mode:

> With the `-e` option, a script shall be produced that shall, when provided as
> input to `ed`, along with an appended `w` (write) command, convert `file1`
> into `file2`.

So now, you can probably write a `patch` command :smile: you parse the output
from `diff`, with maybe slight modification, and then pass it as input to `ed`!
