---
title: 'Learning is not (usually) time wasted'
tags: [ learning, rants, time ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

Way back in January, YouTube subjected me to an advertisement from Exam Labs.
What follows is a direct quote: "Looking for a job in tech? Don't waste hundreds
of hours learning."

Exam Labs, if you read this---you do technology a disservice. You need only
examine the recent cyber attacks and the various flaws in our technology to
understand that solving problems without adequate understanding ends in
disaster.

I have no idea what your business model is (I have not linked to you or visited
your website---I do not wish to give you undeserved web points in the form of
traffic). I suspect, based on the quote and name, that it does your clients a
disservice. Depriving anyone of the opportunity to learn is a disservice.

Assuming you charge a fee to pass exams (be they certifying or collegiate), you
do society a disservice. Money cannot buy skill, cannot buy expertise, cannot
build technology. Sending the message that money can buy a job reinforces
structures built only in the name of inequity.

## Learning is a crucial technology skill

If you disagree with this header, well, I cannot see why. When was the last time
you sat down to work with a piece of technology and learned nothing in the
process? When did you last use a new piece of technology without learning about
it?

It should be obvious that learning is a crucial skill in _all_ jobs---in all of
life, really. I won't belabor this point.

Becoming an expert does not mean you stop learning. Invention and discovery are
educational activities. Expertise often means you know how to learn quickly in a
domain (in addition to being able to sift through and connect relevant bits of
information). Expertise in one domain often translates to others; expertise in
learning always translates.

The hundreds of hours Exam Labs (falsely) equated with learning are hundreds of
hours spent becoming an expert in anything (see, for example, _The Art of
Learning_ by Joshua Waitzkin). Developing a skill takes time.

## How else will you acquire fundamental technology skills?

Most jobs are in technology these days. Most of us learn on the job---we have
to. That is the nature of adapting to fluid situations, the nature of solving
problems, the nature of creative human beings.

"On the job" is not a good time to learn the fundamentals unless the job is
"trainee" or "student" or similar.

You may be hired for your strengths in a core business domain. You are very
likely to be hired for your fundamental skills and ability to learn the core
business domain. There you may apply your fundamental skills alongside your
unique skills.

## Not everything is Google-able

Yes, I know StackOverflow exists. I help people solve problems on affiliated
sites almost daily. I cannot often Google the answer to the question. Even
when I can, the results invariably mean I have to combine separate pieces of
knowledge into a cohesive whole. This requires learning those pieces.

Ever tried to solve a problem before? Did you first study the problem, or dive
in with no knowledge of it? (Most of us have probably done both.) Which approach
lead to a better solution (for some definition of better)?

## Learning looks different for everyone

I'm not suggesting that we all get 4-year degrees in Computer Science (how
elitist that would be). Nor am I suggesting we all get 4-year degrees! Education
does not need to mean various lower schools to high school to college. How many
of our passions are self-taught, self-discovered?

Experimentation is a form of learning I practice regularly. Using something
breeds intimate knowledge of it.

_No_ learning, however, is not learning. Shortcut learning is often not
learning (or at least, not learning the right skills).

## Learning does not equal hundreds of hours

Learning something adjacent to my expertise is often a matter of minutes or a
few hours.

Learning something completely new to me can range from days to a lifetime.

This false equivalence suggests that learning, because it requires so much time,
must be a waste. This is only fallacious. Plenty of things (sleep, hobbies,
cleaning, conversation) require large amounts of time---they are not a waste.

Admittedly, one does not become a black belt in mere days.

## I don't want to work with anyone who always skips learning

And why should I? The habit of skipped learning is arrogant: it says, "I know
everything I need."

I must emphasize that skipped school is not always skipped learning:
it may be learning a different trade, a different way. Early Americans had time
off school for the harvest (or at least, so I was taught---I find it hard to
rely on my education of American History in the details).

I must also emphasize that skipping learning occasionally is acceptable. For
example: A new feature in a framework you've mastered may not be relevant to you
immediately. Skip it and get the job done. (You may want to revisit it later,
though.) It is the habit that says, "Learning is beneath me" that I find
deplorable.

Do not skip the fundamentals. They are so-called for a reason. One does not build
a tower on sand.

Do not skip the problem. One does not solve the unknown.
