---
title: 'Re: The Functional Programming Hiring Problem'
tags: [fp]
category: [ Blog ]
---

The identified problem may be missing the mark.

[Noah Snelson articulates a common theme of functional programming (FP)
discussions](https://blog.janissary.xyz/posts/hiring-functional-programming):
the (dis)advantages of hiring engineers for less-well-known FP languages. I
personally appreciated the time Snelson spent crafting their article, but I've
got one issue with it: I think they missed a class of candidates.

Snelson believes that when hiring for languages such as the fictional Gooby, you
have 3 pools of applicants:

1. The résumé-spammers.
1. Bright undergrads recently converted to the "One True Way."
1. Senior engineers who only care about Gooby.

I agree that these are 3 types of potential Gooby applicants! I disagree that
there's a meaningful difference between converted undergraduates and senior
engineers _in the context of the article's problems._

## Are these senior engineers behaving like senior engineers?

The senior engineers certainly have more Gooby expertise than the converted
undergraduates. Snelson's characterizations reveal that these engineers are
still drinking the Kool-Aid, though:

- They "_insist_ on using a functional language at every moment possible"
  (emphasis original).
- They "threaten to quit if their next project wasn't written in their language
  of choice."
- They appeal to the authority of
  [BDFL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benevolent_dictator_for_life)s "as a kind
  of trump-card argument in technical discussions."

This does not, in my mind, a senior engineer make.

## Another kind of engineer

All the noise of technical obsession obscures the missing 4th class of
applicants: those who have the nuance of thought we expect from leaders. Those
who understand that [simple questions have complex answers]({% link
pages/about.md %}#me).

The obsessed-senior problem is not particular to FP, either. Languages that
encourage imperative or OO style  have the same type of zealots (JavaScript,
Java, C, C++, etc.). Rust has its own zealotry and is markedly harder to
classify. [Shriram Krishnamurthi argues that such classifications are not a
useful concept: the features of a language and how they interact provides a
better discussion
frame.](https://cs.brown.edu/courses/cs173/2012/Videos/2012-09-05/2012-09-05.m4v)
(I recommend the [whole video
series](https://cs.brown.edu/courses/csci1730/2012/Videos/)).

This raises the question: if you're selecting for problematic "senior"
engineers, are you selecting right? The problems of zealotry are correctly
identified (my personal experience agrees), but maybe "not selecting for
zealots" doesn't mean "not selecting for language experts." Selecting for senior
Gooby engineers does not require relaxing criteria for critical thinking.

If your hiring process filters for "personnel issues" of the kind Snelson
describes, then fix the hiring process. Look for candidates who consider
multiple angles and respond "it depends." ["Anyone who is certain about what is
and isn't true about software is probably
wrong."](https://www.hillelwayne.com/talks/ese/)

Snelson concludes by citing Cromwell and a Tumblr user as a reminder that
sometimes we are wrong. Ironically, the Tumblr post's "it depends" aligns with
exactly my argument: hire developers who understand and appreciate nuance. _They
are probably still deep experts of some domain_. Nuance typically comes from
expertise.
