---
title: 'Sapling Cage'
tags: [books]
category: [ Blog ]
---

My thoughts on Margaret Killjoy's _Sapling Cage_.

## Balance in all things

Reading _Sapling Cage_ took me back to reading fantasy as a preteen. Simply
written for a younger audience, it's a page-turner for (nominally) grown adults,
too. Killjoy hooked me in to a world in the grips of dynamic power struggles
without complex dialogue, elaborate descriptions, or impossible backdrops. In
fact, except for the violence and a certain caldera, it all feels rather
mundane. This leaves room for the excitement of the coming of age tale, the
making of friends, the fear of discovery.

## Words, actions, magic

Each of these has power. A witch must use all three.

Indeed, our main character Lorel observes and experiences violence for what it
is: hard, traumatic, gory, mournful. Yet she also experiences other powerful
actions: tentative allies unite against a threat; witches defend and enfold
someone who is other; a knight speaks for the weak.

Even on the very beginning of a journey into magic, we all learn something about
finding our power.

## As a cisgender man

I witnessed through Killjoy's narrative a story of complexity: growing up as a
boy while being a girl. The main character struggles to figure out what to make
of her body---would it be easier if it matched the expectations of others? Would
such a change make her less attractive to a crush? Is this not her body,
imperfect as it is? _Is it ok not to like her body?_

Moreover, she navigates fear and uncertainty: the fear of being found out, which
might be deadly. The uncertainty of who she can trust. Simultaneously her heart
swells with joy each time she is "girl" or "she." Like Lorel's friends (and even
rivals), we can all listen, learn, and love.

Killjoy reminds me that these questions---Lorel's questions---are worth asking
of ourselves, and that we all experience their answers differently.

I highly recommend _Sapling Cage_ (and my thanks to Cory Doctorow, whose
recommendation put it on my reading list).
