---
title: 'Day one on a new team'
tags: [ software-engineering ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

This is my shortlist of "Day 1 questions" for new teams to help me get up to
speed. In no particular order:

0. Domain & Design
1. Performance budget
2. Expected scale factors
3. Customer success
4. Team norms and culture

Examples drawn from real work.

## Domain & Design

What do we do? How do we accomplish it?

This could be things like "manage case lifecycles via tenant-configured platform
services," "keep data flowing with automatically managed Kafka instances," or
"provide cost recommendations to clients by analyzing data ingested from their
systems."

Ideally this comes with a domain breakdown of key terms. Examples: tokenized
plastic/PAN; drain/kill/rehydrate; Snowflake contract and connection details.

## Performance budget

What is the budget? I want to know the total expectations and by subsystem (we
should have those, right?). How do we know if we are (not) meeting those
budgets? What characteristics do we measure (mean, stddev, IQR, p90, shape of
distribution[^1], etc.) and what are they? What are our target specs end-to-end
(our hardware and our clients' hardware, with a focus on the clients).

See [Performance inequality on the
web](https://infrequently.org/series/performance-inequality) for what happens
when we get this right (or wrong).

## Expected scale factors

Scale factors are the things whose increase will be felt across the system.
Examples might be number of customers, objects, transactions, queries, etc.. How
have we designed to meet changing needs with scale? How do we know if we are
(not)?

We may be planning to reimplement and rearchitect if we can't meet new scale
requirements, and that's an acceptable answer as long as we understand the cost
and know when (preferably before) we hit those points.

## Customer success

How do we know what our customers need? How do we know if those needs are (not)
met? How do we know when something goes wrong and what it is? How do we get
side-by-side feedback? How is customer engagement or success incorporated back
into the product?

## Team norms and culture

How do we communicate (meetings, chat, email)? How do we track work-to-do, work
done, priorities, and roadblocks?

How do we develop and deploy code or land it in main? This includes

- important areas of review focus
- what PRs/pushes look like (and whether we use PRs or something else)
- commit hygiene standards ([an example set of hygiene
  standards](https://cbea.ms/git-commit/), though it doesn't cover scoping
  changes or branch/PR hygiene)
- code quality (what's automated and what's not)
- local setup and development
- test data
- pairing/mobbing norms

## Notes

[^1]: We must not commit crimes of statistics, after all. Don't assume unimodal,
    Normal distributions. Please provide a measure of spread with a measure of
    central tendency.
