---
title: More on the AI bubble
tags: [ llm ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

Say the hard things.

I've [previously written some of my own criticism]({% link
_posts/2025-04-18-skepticism.md %}) and [signal-boosted others]({% link
_posts/2025-08-09-signal-boost.md %}), so let's tie a few more threads together.

Ed Zitron famously writes about the AI bubble these days. I've just read Baldur
Bjarnason's [comparison to the financial bubble and Icelandic
nationalism](https://www.baldurbjarnason.com/2025/the-melancholy-of-history-rhyming/),
wherein he mentions "accountability sinks" (a phrase I've mostly learned from
Cory Doctorow). And finally, Ron Jeffries of Agile and XP fame [_leads_ with
"tools of the oppressor"](https://ronjeffries.com/articles/-w025/y/w/).

When I said "the development and use of LLMs consistently harms along the axes
which I care more about," these are the axes I mean. Politically, economically,
and socially, LLMs chain us to the whims of oppressors, fascists, and
monopolists who seek to enshrine their right to cheat us of ours.

"Rights for me, not for thee."

Gross. I don't want that world: remember when we had some protection from all
the scams? Consumer harms? Plague? Those shields weren't perfect, but to see
folks now twist the very real history of racism in all aspects of this society
to argue that the protections were the _problem_ is horrific.

I may not trust the government to make the best decision for me, but I sure as
hell don't trust oppressors, fascists, and monopolists either. In a functioning
democracy backed by experts, at least I stand a chance of making a good
decision and being protected from the worst harms.

According to the Wall Street Journal article "Florida Seeks to End Vaccine
Mandates for Schoolchildren" (2025 September 3rd), Michael Ramey said

> Parents are capable of making these [vaccination] decisions, and will by
> nature safeguard the best interests of their children.

This is no lie[^1]. Yet it is absurd to claim that, in this era of
misinformation and [epistemological
crisis](https://pluralistic.net/tag/epistemology/), any one of us can reliably
sift through all the information we need to make a reasonable-enough judgement
to keep ourselves and our families safe.

But that's what we're required to do when we fire all the experts and poison the
wells of knowledge.

Isn't that what the LLM bubblers are clamoring for?

## Notes

[^1]: Except when it is: parents abuse children. According to the National
    Children's Alliance, [76% of substantiated abuse charges in 2022 fell on a
    parent or
    guardian](https://www.nationalchildrensalliance.org/media-room/national-statistics-on-child-abuse/).
