---
title: Chats on LLMs
tags: [ llm ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

Collected from Discord

In response to both this quote:

> The user apparently believes LLMs are inherently unethical in their existence,
> so, by extension, any use of them is also inherently unethical, and they (the
> user) will therefore not use any products of LLMs in any way whatsoever.

and recent projects collecting lists of "tainted" "slopware":

I think most absolute positions are likely incorrect, but at the same time
contain merits. For example, I think the notion of abstaining entirely from any
software that has been touched by an LLM (Vim? The Linux kernel?) is untenable
in the long run, and I desperately hope it won’t lead to too much fragmentation
of ideas. (Competing software that does it better is of course welcome.)

As another example, take explicitly condoning LLM use without a statement
engaging with others’ concerns (be it quality, displacement of labor, ethics, or
anything else). I can also sympathize with the absolute position that this
condones and encourages other evils associated with the makers of today’s
commercial LLMs. So my modulation is to take those concerns as indicative that
perhaps we ought to form a community statement about what, precisely, LLM use
means to Racket.

A tool and aid for continuing to do things we value? Something else?

See for example « Engineering rigor in the age of LLMs » and « The peril of
laziness lost » which I have linked before. I may dislike some of Brian’s
enthusiasm for them, but I also can see where he's coming from and respect how
he encourages rigorous use.

---

In response to this quote:

> I think it's inevitable though. Every leap in technology from books to
> film/video to the internet often displaces/shakes industries up. It's either
> adapt or be the old man who shouts at the clouds saying "back in my day...".
> Whether its generated by LLMs or not, what matters above all else is if its
> valuable and improves the project

I think the difficulty is pinning down meanings of « valuable » and « improves
».

Is it valuable to add new features if they also create legal risk ? Is it an
improvement to automate away paper cut bugs that deprive new contributors of
pathways to get started, learn the code base, and mature into maintainers?

These things are decidedly grey areas to me.

---

I think it's hard to deny that there are valuable uses. I think it is equally
hard to deny there are wasteful, or evil, or \<other negatively connoted\> uses.
And I think the commercial side (even Anthropic in some ways) leans into one
side more than the other, to our detriment. I think this makes it more important
to qualify what our community holds dear and how LLMs fit (and don't fit) into
that equation.
