---
title: Thoughts from recent conversations on LLMs
tags: [ llm, unpolished, politics ]
category: [ Blog ]
---

Some unpolished thoughts from a recent conversation with other software
engineers.

I’m willing to be practical, but I find the « tools » conversation needs to wait
until we’ve addressed at least some of the political weaponization. Ironically,
this is one of the good things about the tools conversation! An LLM cannot do my
job, and we should stop allowing them to be weaponized as if they could.

[What is political weaponization?]

See, e.g., Cory Doctorow’s « an LLM can’t do your job, but a salesman can
convince your boss it can » for examples in employment (esp. in tech; companies
would love for us to be as low-status as your average retail worker); see Grok
being used to spew Musk’s many -isms or generally any attempt to dismantle the
notion of truth (epistemological crisis); see US v China (Deepseek); see ["AGI:
Probably Not 2027"](https://www.verysane.ai/p/agi-probably-not-2027) for a
rebuttal of the fantasy that swept up folks in our government; see [Iris
Meredith’s blog](https://deadsimpletech.com/blog) for some specifics on people
and projects involved (I believe I got the phrase from them—site: search is
probably useful to find relevant articles).

[When pushed on how long the conversation should wait]

I can see how ["we shouldn't be talking about how this fits into our lives as
developers as a tool until the weaponization stops"] is an interpretation of my
statement. I suppose I mean: I find the tool conversation fascinating, but
ultimately less urgent than systemic abuse.

Right now my preferred direction of energy is toward addressing such abuse. (Of
course, much like we sometimes get markers from Amazon to make our protest
posters, I can use a devtool to support addressing such issues.)

In all fairness, I think a lot of spaces I’m in (including this one) are having
the tool conversation in good faith. But it sure didn’t feel that way at the
start, and I still can’t wrap my head around one conversation often not
acknowledging the other. But there’s so much going on in a giant intersection
that it also seems entirely rational to focus in on small parts at a time, and
it sure seems even harder to have an all-encompassing conversation! So I’m glad
to try to focus and chat however it works out.

I also find that my stubborn streak encourages me to make strong claims and then
fall back to something closer to moderation in practice, provided we agree that
« moderation » requires acknowledging certain indelible lines, even if we
disagree how to implement those lines.

Ambiguity is probably good for us like that.

« Engineering Rigor in the Age of LLMs » has certainly given me a newfound
excitement about the potential, despite all of my concerns about the «
LLMentalist effect » or about the replication of harmful social norms.

I think in particular it revealed a possibility of using the tool with
discernment (« this use emphatically doesn’t matter »). I hold that such
discernment is difficult and is helped by engagement with all the liberal arts,
including sociology and feminist theory, etc.

[What are good directions for addressing such abuse?]

Simply (hah!): envision a better world and then work for it! A few caveats: of
course that's easier said than done. Ideally, we'd be directing our talents to
serve folks already doing this hard work.

Broadly, I'm looking away from computing to find these opportunities. My
energies are mostly directed at things like the following. The list is too long
but feels deeply connected for me.

- Unions for software engineers. (_e.g._, [Drew DeVault's
  Resources](https://drewdevault.com/2025/06/09/2025-06-09-Unionize-or-die.html#resources))
- Property rights à la right to repair (jailbreak); not allowing continued use
  of DMCA § 1201 to dictate how owners of a device may use said device ("felony
  contempt of business model").
- Self-determination: feminist theory and queer activists have a lot to say
  about being the ultimate arbiter and governor of your own body, which rhymes
  with the "despotic dominion" of property rights.
- Privacy rights, especially digitally; done correctly, I think this could end
  surveillance advertising.
- Anti-monopoly and anti-corruption policy and law.
- Ethics of computation systems (_e.g._, Ruha Benjamin's _Race After
  Technology_, which inspired an essay I've been mulling over for a couple of
  years now). These systems intersect policing and justice in overt and covert
  ways.
- Open source maintenance. As I understand it, the folks doing the really hard
  work are under a tremendous burden and need help. Ask the ones you know or
  depend on how you can help.
- [Situated software]({% link _posts/2025-04-18-skepticism.md %}#situated):
  local, specific software for communities. This rhymes for me with [Resonant
  Computing](https://resonantcomputing.org/).
